Um, thank, great to have you back
after our little interruption the other day,
but it's, thank, thank for you live in Wellington.
And so, uh, feel free to, um, carry on with talking to your,
um, submission please.
And we'll, I leave room for questions.
We have, how long we got? I have 20 minutes.
Great. I, um, thank you very much for having us today.
Um, so Kiara Toto, Kiara Coto, um, co. Elizabeth Haua.
And um, with me today is Joseph Brawley,
who's our Chief Operating Officer.
We're here representing Forest Owners Association.
Um, so we are the membership association
for Production Forestry in New Zealand, so
that's timber producers.
Um, and we've got a membership of, uh, just over 90 now
that encompasses the whole range from, um, large scale
and some multinational forestry companies through to Iwi,
hapu and fauna, uh, businesses.
Uh, we've got, uh, local
and central government forestry investments
and then small scale farm foresters, um, that make up, uh,
just under half of our membership.
Um, and we also work quite closely
and collaboratively with the Farm Forestry Association in
Napolitan, the Maori Forestry Association.
Um, I think, you know, we welcome the opportunity
to talk about the Alto F report from the parliamentary
commissioner for the environment.
Um, you know, it's a, it's a hefty document and,
and we appreciate the, um, depth that the commissioner
and his team went into in, in working on forestry, which is,
um, a really important sector for New Zealand.
Um, so overall, you know, we're really supportive
of the technical information that the commissioner
and his team pulled together and,
and we supported the development of the report.
So, um, we, we appreciated the opportunity, um,
to take them out to site
and to be able to work through some of
how the forestry sector works today and,
and what it might look like in the future.
Um, we would offer the committee the opportunity as well.
Um, if at any stage it's helpful in your, um, examination
of the report to go out
and visit either production forestry sites, um, the kind
of na nature forestry reserves
that we've got within those sites,
including QE two covenants, um,
or, you know, I've, I've spoken
to Nee Tree Trust in the development of our submission.
They do a lot of work on native forestry and a forestation
and, and they'd be happy to facilitate some
field visits as well.
Um, I just know, you know,
it's one thing talking about trees
and wood processing, um, in, in Parliament,
but then it's quite another to actually be out,
out in the field and kind of see things in, in, um,
so look, I'll, I'll just speak for about half the time
and then we can get into some questions.
Great. Um, I think, you know, we outlined in our submission
that there's a number of the commissioner's recommendations
that we very strongly agree with including, um, uh,
taking a more systems-based approach to how we review, um,
forestry and, and forest practice in the country.
Um, we agree that there needs to be an examination
of the Forest Act, um,
and you know, that's a, a piece of legislation
that's not been looked at for a very long time.
Um, and that there's, there's probably enabling provisions
and, and updates that could be worked through in a review
of that legislation.
Um, that, that we could get into more detail about.
Um, I guess just to focus in,
in the submission today on some of the areas where we differ
with the, um, work that the commissioner's office have done.
Um, so we've got really strong opposition
to removing forestry from the emissions trading scheme
or to restructuring the way forestry participates
in the emissions trading scheme.
Um, so a a lot
of my members are emissions trading scheme participants
as production foresters
and the statistics around production forestry in the ETS.
Um, so there's about 80%
of the participants in the emissions trading scheme
that are smaller scale holders.
Um, so that there's, there's gonna be a mix in there
of farm foresters and then small scale foresters.
And the carbon revenue is really important for them
for management, particularly at a time when margin
compression is a very real, um, and
and hard thing for our sector.
Um, we, we have seen costs go up,
but productivity has not kept up with cost
and that's particularly difficult for foresters
who may only have one or two forests on a farm, say, um,
and then have a lot of ongoing costs until they can harvest.
So the way the financial structure is carbon actually
offered an opportunity to keep up
with those rising management costs along the way
and then be able to, um, continue to manage the forest
for increasing predator issues
and a whole range of things
that I'm sure this committee has heard a lot about.
Um, I think it's important to note, so a lot
of the commissioner's concerns are
with permanent carbon forestry.
So, um, I had done an OIA of the ministry
for primary industries, um, mid-year
and only 6%
of the exotic forest in the emissions trading scheme are
registered in the permanent category at this time.
So acknowledging
that not all carbon forests are gonna be registered in the
permanent category, even if you look at the, a forestation
and deforestation intention survey
and, um, 83%
of post 89 participants say they intend to harvest.
So let's say a generous 20% of forests out there are going
to be some kind of long-term carbon forest.
Um, that 20% means that a lot of the people
who are driving past forest today
and say, oh, I think
that might be an unmanaged carbon
forest, they're probably wrong.
And, and a lot of times we're able to work
with communities on, um, the fact that there a lot of,
like the majority of the forests that are in the landscape
will be producing timber in some form.
The carbon income is, is a part now
of the way forestry investors look at forest investment
internationally and domestically.
And I think we need to be incredibly cautious about
how we might restructure them
because keep in mind that 6% of participants
that are permanent registered, that's 39,000 hectares.
It's not, it's not a large land area,
although grant you, it's, it's not incredibly tiny
And total forestry hectare is,
So the total production forestry hectares is 1.8 million
hectares within the country.
Um, I think an another, so you've got, uh, so
that's for, sorry, the, the 39,000 hectares that's out
of 600,000 hectares of exotic forest that's in the ETS.
So it's when we're thinking about
the overall participation in the ETS as well,
a large proportion of our production forests are actually
either, um, pre 1990 forest or not injured into the ETS.
Um, so that being said about, so
That came on your third
of the forestry New Zealands in the ets?
Correct. Wow.
So, so when we talk about that carbon income though,
there are also a lot of Maori forest owners
that are participants in the emissions trading scheme
or that have, um, that,
that their forests are participants
in the emissions trading scheme.
So Maori own about
190,000 hectares of forest
and lease 511,000 hectares of, of forest.
So they're the landlord
Me how many, how much does the lease, sorry. Then,
Uh, 511,000 hectares leased leased.
So, so they've got Maori collectively have 700,
700, 1000 hectares of forest, which is roughly 40%
of New Zealand's stocked estate that they either own
or are the landlord for.
Um, we, we can't break out the, the rates
of participation in the emissions trading scheme necessarily
for Maori and non-Maori participation.
But there's a really important element
that if you were going to make any changes to the way that
that that works and,
and frankly to, to wider forestry policy, there has
to be a strong component of consultation
and partnership with Maori and Maori forest owners on that.
I mean, we have foresters who have, um, forests
that touch on 12 different iwi.
So we have, we do a lot of work with making sure that we,
we are working with, with a broad range of folks
who have different aspirations
for their forests and forest assets.
Mm-hmm. Um, the other thing I wanted to come onto in,
in my presentation, so I think one, one of our key concerns,
and I don't wanna spend too much time on it
because of this, is that a lot
of the commissioner's recommendations
after a very fulsome report on forestry
we're focused on carbon.
Yeah. And it's important, but actually the forestry sector
and wood processing are much wider than that.
And, um, we,
we think the recommendations ended up overly focused on
that element when one of the things that carbon
and, and some of these other things are just enablers
for is thinking about long-term, uh, planning
and management around what we might do with forests
and forest products longer term.
And that's really where the opportunity is
for New Zealand is to set a strategic direction for what,
you know, the, the emissions trading scheme we're only 17
years into that, so we haven't even gone a full rotation,
which is how foresters think.
Right? So we've got predominantly pine forests
because we've, we've set up a model to try
and protect our native forest from logging.
We, we may have a large proportion of pine right now
because it's a, it's a fast growing tree that frankly kind
of like how f friesians are used for milk production.
Um, we've got something that works really well
and economically and so it's hard
to shift once you've got a really good producing species.
But we've got an opportunity, um, as we look to the next 20
to 30 years to think about where do we want to be then,
because the current production estate being 1.8 million
hectares, we can't turn the boat quickly on that.
Yeah. So any forestry change, we need
to set a direction like we did when we converted from native
forestry to pine over the course
of the last a hundred years.
We said, we're not gonna over exploit our native forest.
We're gonna have like a muscle tree
that we can use for production.
And we did that really well.
Like New Zealand did a great job of that almost too good.
I think some people would say, I think
for the next 50 years we need to think about
what are the regulatory settings, the innovation settings
that we wanna have, and what's the long term trajectory
that we wanna set for integrated land use broadly mm-hmm.
In, in the rural economy.
So the, the product accelerator did, um,
a great report on this that bioproducts could represent
bioproducts from forestry specifically could represent 12
to $19 billion to the New Zealand economy.
If, if we, so if we get this right,
there's a tremendous opportunity for us
and it's an opportunity that will displace higher emissions
products and,
and things that are actually not serving us as well
as a society from a sustainability perspective.
And globally, I said on an FAO working group,
the FAO is projecting we're gonna really undershoot our
ability to meet the needs for wood fiber.
So there's a real opportunity
for New Zealand ink in this if we can get this right.
Um, but it's gonna require that we don't, we don't make,
um, changes that are gonna kind of crash the system
and that we're working with communities
and people that are really heavily invested in the system
to get there along the way.
Um, so I think one of the other kind of
key recommendations that we'd really like the committee
to think about carefully is, uh, some of the recommendations
around, um, banning Clearfield Harvest
or in environmental damage we're, we're really keen.
So the forest sector has a history of working
with government on things like the environmental standards.
So we we're not, we, we want to have fair regulation.
We, we are not an industry that is asking
for like no regulation or a light touch
because we recognize, just like with health
and safety, we have a really tricky system that we work in
that that there's a lot of risks that we need
to manage, right?
Yeah. So we've got risk-based tools and regulation.
What we would ask is that specific risks aren't managed.
So like putting a clear fell ban in
where you may actually raise other risks along the way.
And that's really what, what I'll leave the committee
with is, is our key recommendation would be, we understand
that with forestry it's a long-term industry, which is hard
'cause people, it's hard for us
to think in decades a lot of times.
But that's the challenge that we have with forestry.
We also really need to balance the kind of top down approach
for regulation with our ability to innovate on the ground.
So TA's Tree Trust are doing some great work right now as a,
for instance on transition forestry.
So for areas that are in Native Forest,
how do you meaningfully transition them to Native forest
That are in Sorry, And exotic forest.
Sorry. Yeah. So if it's inex exotic forest,
how do you transition 'em?
And they're looking at, you know, seed source and,
and how does the economics of that work?
I think this report does a really good deep dive
on transition for us.
And is is ultimately a little bit dismissive of it
as a practice, but we look,
I think there's a lot more science to go
and of course as somebody trained in science, I'm gonna say
that, but I think we don't wanna kill
innovation right out of the gate.
We, we, we really wanna work with government to make sure
that there's an enabling environment for in innovation
in practice that is still managing risk effectively.
And I think it's a balance in forestry that we're in danger
of tipping too far in the wrong direction.
Yep. Um, so some of the recommendations particularly around,
um, how we manage environmental risk,
we would just recommend, let's take a horses
for courses approach and work through what
that looks like on the ground
so we don't manage individual risk
and then raise other risks.
Anyway, look, great presentation on
a few questions on Rachel. Start.
I'll, I'll start with two questions. Sorry,
now I've got a couple you can answer.
They're quite separate questions though,
but I'll give them both to you now.
Um, the first one is that you said, well, industries worked,
uh, with government in terms of the, um, regulations,
the NES that's had a couple of different forms,
but, uh, put it to you that that's an example
of really industry, um,
demand well getting, uh, and improper
or ineffective or not good regulation in terms
of all of the permitted activities that were in that NES.
So, you know, I'd be interested in your response to
that when you're saying that,
and I'll come to my second question too before you ask that.
Sure. Okay. And also that, um, you're saying, well,
the recommendation around clear failing
that's too blunt an instrument.
So where, where would you see as something that's,
uh, enough regulation to protect the environmental issues
that we've seen with clear foing?
Um, so that's my question.
And then the second question is,
you were talking about the need, um, for biomass in, in the,
I think you said like nine to $19 billion
or some giant amount of money, um,
potentially coming from forestry.
And the third is the kind of things
that Scion is working on.
And maybe you could expand on that.
And then also if, um, if those types of activities,
if they're ones that rely on the current way
that we see clear failing
or if they pick up more of the biomass, um, then that,
you know, think clear failing
that we've all driven past at some point.
Yeah. Cool. Um, so in terms of the effectiveness
of the national environmental standards
for commercial forestry, um, I'll just acknowledge.
So I was an official that worked on the documents, um, uh,
when they first were enacted.
'cause there was a seven, seven, depending on
how you count it, seven to nine year development process.
Um, so there was a report that was developed as part of that
as to whether the national environmental standard was more
stringent than council plans at the time. And it was
Some of them. So
the majority of them, yeah, but
Not all of them. So
I think when,
when we're talking about the effectiveness
of the national environmental standards,
so we have a couple examples within the industry of
where it has had an impact.
For instance, a lot of the nurseries
that grew Douglas fir in the South island mm-hmm.
Have shuttered in the last few years.
And we're just doing a survey right now
to try and get the data on that.
But we, I could tell you off the top of my head,
there's three or four businesses
that either the nurseries don't grow dug fur anymore
or they have, um, gone outta business
because of the, um, wilding calculator, um,
which I know the government's currently updating.
But that has, that has had an impact.
Um, in terms of practice on the ground.
There has been a change in practice, um, uh, off the back
of the national environmental standards both
for plantation forestry and now for commercial forestry.
Um, I think the perception
that the industry has held the pen on it is not true.
And I could put our environment committee in front of you
who would give you a litany
of the things they would like from a practice perspective
to make their, to make it better for them
to operate in the field.
So the permitted activity status, we still seek a lot
of consents because we're not sure as to whether
or not we're gonna meet the permitted activity conditions.
So I think the, what,
What, what activity class of consents.
Uh, I I would have to go and look.
I would, I wouldn't wanna hazard a guess off the top
of my head, but I, I know I have noncompliant,
Noncompliant or not non compliant.
I, I would, I would have to go
and check with my foresters.
Um, I, I think I would just say at a, at a high level,
we, we are not, it's not a blank check for us
and we do not have like wide open practice
around the national environmental
standards commercial forest.
There is a high level of planning and permission
and work that we have to do that system.
So the concept that the permitted activity regime has
somehow just opened a gate for us to do whatever we want.
I, that the engineering costs alone of
how people do road building now would suggest
that that is not the case.
And, and I think something that we are working on
as a sector is collectively being able to tell
that story more effectively of how practice has had
to shift in response to the regulations.
Um, but we're having to adapt practice all the time to
increase environmental risk.
And, and it's not, we've often as a sector foresters,
you know, most of them have engineering degrees.
I, I think they won't mind me saying they're often quite
introverted because they've chosen to work in the forest
and they've not been great in the past about telling the
story of the work that they're doing
to address environmental effects.
That is something that we are actively working on,
being able to explain a lot more clearly
because there are definite engineering
and practice changes that have occurred in the last few
years in the same way
that 10 years ago we had harvesting fatalities that were
any fatalities is unacceptable.
But that was, it was an issue that needed to be dealt with
and we did a whole range of engineering and,
and mechanization that has now brought us
to a much better place in the sector,
but we're not sitting on our laurels.
There's continuous improvement
and innovation that's happening to make sure
that we get to a better place.
And that innovation is also encompassing, um,
machinery improvements
around environmental practice as well.
Um, so I'm, I'm happy to do a deeper dive on that,
but I would say the, the conception
that the NES is somehow like, like wide open, I think
the, the issue that we've got is if
industry isn't involved in how some of the limits are set,
then it it means that our contractors actually can't execute
to it on the ground and you just end up with a forest
that can't be harvested.
But that's different. Being involved in a regulatory
setting process is different from driving it.
Yeah, that was my point there. Yeah.
But if you could answer the other part
as well and then we'll
have to wind it up. Yeah, sorry. Even
Yeah, for sure. But
so, so in,
and I guess the clear fell controls kind of touches on the
biomass and bioproducts.
So in terms of, in terms of how we would use bioproducts,
so the Bioeconomy Science Institute, we are working
with them on the development of
what we're calling a bio factory.
Mm-hmm. So basically to be able to take more products
to commercial production that would come out of wood
and wood products, but there would be opportunities
for agriculture in that as well.
Um, so there's a, uh, Toyota Raow, uh,
our levy trust and um, uh, one
of our forestry companies have come together
to put some money into a business case
around developing a facility near the Scion campus
that will develop bioproducts.
Those bioproducts, though, I just wanna be really clear,
rely on wood processing.
So you have to have clean residues for that to work.
So there's two separate problems that people are trying
to solve in New Zealand and they often get conflated.
Okay. One is residues in the forest.
What we know is slash What sometimes is technically
slash and often is wood debris.
Mm-hmm. Um, just, sorry, putting my science hat on. Yeah.
But when, when we talk about forest practice, um,
there are areas where we can recover wood debris really
easily and in those areas of the country, some of that,
if it's, if it's tidy enough, can be used for wood energy
and for some other, um, calf bedding.
Like there's a whole range of economic uses
that we're trying to look for for that.
Um, but, but some wood debris and,
and particularly from storm events
or other things will not be recoverable
for those kind of uses.
Okay. When we talk about the really high-end products
of things like sustainable aviation fuel
that needs clean residues that come directly out
of a wood processing facility. Right.
So you've got the log that's in the
facility that's we getting
It from a hundred percent.
And that's one of the reasons we desperately need more
onshore wood processing.
Yes. And that we're working
with our colleagues in the wood processes
and manufacturers association to develop and,
and to work with the government on what's enabling
of getting more manufacturing on shore
and building manufacturing hubs that can have, you know,
bioproducts development that's alongside,
uh, timber for building. So that's what
You're also, sorry, you sorry, you just referred
to three different organizations that, um, yourselves
and others trying to build a facility.
Yeah. Is this the facility you're trying to build
or It's a separate facility.
So I think the facility we're trying to build is,
is a research facility.
So they've got 30 of these across Europe. Right.
But they've also got a higher population. Mm-hmm.
But that's, it's a facility that'll help
commercialize products.
What I'm then talking about in the second part of my answer
is, is, is finding ways that we can
attract investment in wood processing in
communities in New Zealand.
Right. Um, 'cause
because that's, that's ultimately how we're gonna be able
to, to meet goals around growing the economy or,
and doing sustainable materials
development, doing this other stuff.
Well I have to call there
because some fascinating hearing there
and um, it actually sort of highlights the potential
and a broader discussion at some point.
But yeah, thank you for, thanks very much for coming in
and um, it was a very interesting, I didn't get
to ask my questions 'cause Rachel took all the time.
But, uh, thank you and uh,
we look forward to seeing you again. I'm sure.
Thank you very much. Appreciate it.